Core Characteristics of Python:

General Purpose: It is a general-purpose programming language, meaning you can use it to build almost anything.

Open Source: It is completely free to use.

Packages: It has a massive ecosystem of "packages" (pre-written code), which makes it heavily used for Data Science and many other application fields.

Two Ways to Use Python:

IPython (Interactive Python): * Created by Fernando Perez.

It is part of the broader Jupyter ecosystem.

Best for: Quick experimentation and testing small ideas on the fly.

Python Scripts: * These are standard text files saved with a .py extension.

They contain a list of Python commands (similar to what you would type in the IPython shell, but saved permanently).

Best for: Writing actual, reusable answers in DataCamp (and writing real-world pipelines).

The Data Engineer's Definition:

"Python is a readable, English-like programming language that Data Engineers use to build the automated pipelines that extract, clean, and move data between different systems."
📦 Variables & Data Types
1. Variables (The Pointers)
A variable is a named pointer that holds a piece of data in the computer's memory.

You create one by assigning a value using the = sign.

Python uses Dynamic Typing: You don't have to declare the type upfront.

Example: record_id = 101

2. The 4 Core Data Types

Integer (int): Whole numbers. Used for counting items (e.g., row_count = 500).

Float (float): Decimal numbers. Used for precise measurements or currency (e.g., temperature = 98.6).

String (str): Text data. Must always be wrapped in quotation marks (e.g., status = "active").

Boolean (bool): Logical switches that are only ever True or False (e.g., is_clean = True).

3. Type Casting (Data Conversion)

The process of changing data from one type to another.

When extracting raw data from APIs or CSVs, numbers often arrive as Strings. You must "cast" them before doing math.

Example: clean_price = float("45.99")

Pro-tip: If you are ever confused by a variable, print type(variable_name) to see exactly what it is.
